So what are 3D medical images?
First, let's revisit 2D medical images.
You may recall from prior courses
that 2D medical images encompass such things as radiographs,
colloquially known as X-rays,
digital histology or pathology slides,
that is tissues looked at under a microscope,
or may include things such as direct clinical photography of a patient's condition.
So how do 2D and 3D medical images differ?
Intuitively, a 2D image has an xy-plane and is usually viewed as a single image.
On the contrary, you can think of a 3D medical image as
a series of images stacked up so that you now have a z-axis,
like having multiple slices of bread put together so that you have the whole loaf.
Here's a more practical example.
On the left, we have a scout radiograph.
This is a low resolution X-ray taken before a CT scan to help plan the study,
which areas we're going to cover and help label the slices.
On the right, we have the CT scan itself taken immediately afterwards.
You can see on the left we have a good representation of the patient,
but all of the structures are overlapping,
meaning they are projecting over one another and we have
a limited ability to interact with the image.
Now on the right, let's take a look at how we can interact with the CT scan and
get a much better idea of the patient's underlying anatomy and possible disease state.
As we play the clip, we can see that we're going from front to back in the patient,
and there's a much better highlighting of
the patient's anatomy and a sense that we can localize things better.
Later on in the lesson,
we'll see how these features of CT and
other 3D medical images will help us diagnose disease better.
Now let's see some examples of 3D imaging modalities.
CT is the most commonly ordered 3D medical imaging study
and is a diagnostic work horse for many clinical situations.
It's an X-ray based modality and excels at
combining speed and good diagnostic performance.
In some situations, however,
it can lack in its ability to pick up on nuance changes in
the soft tissues were distinguished between particular diseases.
That's where MRI comes in.
MRI uses magnetic field alterations and
radio-frequency pulses to obtain data from
the patient without the use of ionizing radiation.
It's frequently used to supplement information initially gleaned on CT or as
the sole modality if the disease in question is known to be most easily picked up on MRI.
CT and MRI are the modalities that you'll likely
encounter most frequently when working with 3D medical imaging data sets,
and are the focus of this course.
Positron emission tomography and single photon emission
computed tomography are nuclear medicine examinations.
Nuclear medicine is a medical specialty that uses radioactive tracers
administered to a patient to assess bodily functions and diagnose and treat disease.
The energy emitted by the patient after
the radio tracer is administered is imaged using a Gamma camera.
Radioactive tracers are made up of
a carrier molecule that's bound tightly to a radioactive atom.
These carrier molecules vary depending on the purpose of the scan.
Some tracers employ molecules that interact with a specific protein or sugar in the body,
and can even employ the patients on cells.
For most diagnostic studies in nuclear medicine,
the radioactive tracer is administered to the patient by an intravenous injection.
However, it can also be given as an inhaled medication,
oral ingestion, or even direct injection to an organ.
The choice of tracer and mode of tracer administration
is going to depend on the disease process as to be studied.
These studies can often add complimentary,
functional or even physiologic information,
and above and beyond what you can pick up on CT and MRI,
though they do tend to comparatively lack in anatomic detail.
Lastly, ultrasound is an imaging modality which straddles the 2D and 3D imaging worlds.
Ultrasound imaging uses a transducer to
generate sound waves that interact with the patient's tissues.
The reflected waves are subsequently used to
generate images or the structures which they've interacted with.
It doesn't use ionizing radiation,
is rapidly acquired and can be used directly at the patient's bedside.
While most commonly viewed as a series of 2D images,
3D image reconstructions and cinematic clips consisting of image stacks are often used.
You may encounter such datasets in the wild,
though will not be a focus in this course.
We now have an idea of what 3D medical images
are and the most common modalities used to generate them.
We'll now discuss why we would use 3D medical images over 2D.